The diversity, frequency and distribution of pollinator interactions in the OrchidaceaeAckerman et al.Charles Darwin was not wrong.  The Orchid family is fascinating for not only their fantastic flowers, vegetative forms, and extraordinary species richness, but also for what they tell us about evolutionary processes. “On the various contrivances by which British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects” was a compilation of studies that supported Darwin’s theory on the origin of species through the process of natural selection (Darwin 1862).  The various contrivances (pollination mechanisms) described in the orchid book were interpreted as means to enhance the probability of outcrossing, a cornerstone of his theory. So, orchids became special not just to orchidists, but among biologists as well. And, over time, more unusual pollination mechanisms came to light, as well as the means of attracting pollinators.Nonetheless, in the first half of the twentieth century, the contribution of orchid biology to evolutionary theory faded. Orchids nearly ceased to be a model system for evolutionary studies, and nearly all work on orchids was in taxonomy and horticulture.  Early in the second half of the century, van der Pijl and Dodson (1966) published “Orchid flowers: their pollination and evolution” which was packed with remarkable observations and discussions of such diverse topics as functional morphology, pollinator attraction, orchid pollinators (syndromes), mimicry and deception, autogamy, speciation and hybridization.  The authors also included a list of approximately 325 orchid species and their pollinators, which represents 1.1% of the species in the family (based on a recent count: 28484; WCSP 2021). The predominant pollinators of the family were bees, deceitful species were estimated at one third of the family, and autogamy was estimated to occur in 3% of the species (Table 1). While this work is more than a half century old, it remains an important source of information (Shrestha et al. 2020), yet clearly could use a detailed update. Here we introduce a new database on orchid pollination with which we aim to test whether key assumptions on orchid biology have withstood the test of time. Furthermore, we identify knowledge gaps and trends.  What are the frequencies of mating and breeding systems, particularly autogamy and self-incompatibility? The mantra of every self-respecting orchidologist since Darwin is, “the remarkable pollination mechanisms exhibited by orchids are adaptations to enhance the probability of cross-pollination”.  One would expect that autogamy would be unusual in the family, yet it has been common enough to be scrutinized in literature reviews (Catling 1990; Peter 2011). Most orchids are self-compatible (Tremblay et al. 2005), which sets the stage for the evolution of autogamy, especially when pollinator services do not exist, are infrequent or unpredictable (Ortiz-Barney and Ackerman 1999). Are some regions more replete with autogamous orchids than others? There is some evidence that species in high latitudes and on islands are more likely to be self-pollinating than in lower latitudes or continental regions, which is congruent with the reproductive assurance hypothesis (e.g., Hagerup 1952; Jain 1976; Ackerman 1985). Are terrestrial species more likely to be autogamous than epiphytes? Neotropical Gesneriaceae are similar in some respects to orchids: they are well known for their plant-pollinator relationships and occupy both terrestrial and epiphytic habitats. Martén-Rodríguez et al. (2015) discovered that autonomous self-pollination was highest in rupiculous and epiphytic species and that this is related to unpredictable and unfavourable weather conditions for pollination. Is this true for orchids as well?What are the frequencies of different means for attracting pollinators and how are they distributed within the family?— A hallmark of orchid pollination is the unusual proportion of species that employ deceit to attract pollinators. No other family of flowering plants is as deceitful (Renner 2006).  Van der Pijl and Dodson (1966) estimated that one third of the family are nectarless, though it is not clear whether they meant deceitful, since there are other types of rewards beside nectar (Peter 2011). Dressler (1993) estimated 25% of the family are deceitful but this figure has been largely overlooked. The one-third figure has been quoted numerous times in the context of deception (Shrestha et al. 2020).  Only Peter (2011) has made a concerted effort on a global scale to update the frequency of deceit pollination in the family. His estimate (36%) comes close to the one-third figure.       There are two major forms of deceit.  The first involves food deception, which may be generalized food-flower mimicry or specific model-mimicry. The second is sexual deception in which male pollinators are enticed to visit flowers that provide visual, tactile and/or olfactory signals that can be so persuasive that the insects attempt copulation, sometimes even ejaculating on the flower (Gaskett et al. 2008). Observations of sexual deception has expanded substantially in the last few decades, so we may be underestimating the frequency of deceit across the family.      While we presume that all deceitful flowers are nectarless, but as noted above, not all nectarless flowers are deceitful.  There are several other types of rewards: floral volatiles, trichomes, oils, resins, waxes, sleep sites, and mating sites.  Methods for detecting rewards are much more sophisticated than in the past (frequently just visual inspections). These new techniques often reveal minute quantities that nonetheless could be significant to their pollinators (Gomiz et al. 2017; Davies & Stpiczy?ska 2019; Phillips et al. 2020).  	What is the relative frequency of animal taxa that serve as pollinators of orchids? Van der Pijl and Dodson (1966) estimated that the majority of orchids are pollinated by bees (55%), whereas Peter (2011) had no pollinator group dominating, but bees were indeed the most commonly reported pollinators at 40%. Diptera are the second most common functional group of pollinators according to these authors and by all accounts such records are likely to increase simply because many difficult to observe and identify while species-rich groups (e.g., Bulbophyllum, most Pleurothallidinae) exhibit fly pollination syndromes. Similarly, records of moth pollination are also likely to increase, especially for settling moths, a functional group segregated from hovering moths (Sphingidae) by Peter (2011).  Like Diptera, settling moths are often difficult to identify and have the added challenges of observing nocturnal activity. While recent reports of pollination by unusual vectors such as Orthopterans, Reptila and Mammalia are intriguing, they are clearly outliers in the orchid pollinator community (e.g., Michenaux et al. 2010; Rose-Smyth 2019; Wang et al. 2008).Do orchids show high levels of pollinator specificity? —We expect that natural selection would drive evolution towards pollinator specificity[RLTL1] if selection for the most effective pollinator occurs and that it is relatively consistent over time (Stebbins 1970). Diversity in Orchidaceae and other families have been attributed to that process (Grant and Grant 1965; van der Pijl and Dodson 1966; Tremblay 1992), but the functional relationship between specialization and diversity has not always borne out (Kay and Sargent 2009; Knapp 2010). Waser et al. (1996) challenged the notion that specialization is the norm, but Johnson and Steiner (2000) and Ollerton et al. (2009) noted that there are global regions where pollinator specialization appears to be common. Such assertions require solid data and southern Africa, Europe and the Mediterranean are regions where orchid pollination is relatively well studied (e.g., Schatz et al. 2020: Mediterranean). Pollination of European and Mediterranean orchid floras are also relatively well-studied (Schatz et al. 2020). Despite the attention orchids have received, our knowledge of orchid pollinator specificity is meager, given the size of the family.	Defining specificity is problematic, except for the unique case of species-specific interaction. While one may simply count the number of pollinator species that service an orchid, a more nuanced approach assumes that pollinator attraction is more generalized when exploiting multiple higher taxonomic levels (classes, orders, families, genera), or functional groups (e.g., settling moths and hovering moths). Pollination by three different bumblebees is more specialized that pollination by three different orders of insects.  Specialization-generalization not a dichotomy, rather it is a continuum of possibilities[RLTL2].  Herein we address these questions using our orchid pollination database, taking first a global perspective and then explore whether patterns are dependent on plant habit (terrestrial or epiphytic) and geography (latitude and TWDR regions).MethodsLiterature search – We sought information on the reproductive biology of orchids, especially pollinator observations, means of attraction, and breeding and mating systems.  Instead of depending solely on a set of keywords and searching the literature via search engines such as Google Scholar or Web of Science, we used all means to discover literature.  This is particularly important because many publications on orchid pollination are in the "orchid literature" (e.g., orchid society journals), which are not often included in the more scholarly oriented search engines. Particularly helpful have been compilations of van der Pijl and Dodson (1966), Adams and Lawson (1993), van der Cingel (1995, 2001), Pridgeon et al. (1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2009), Claessens and Kleynen (2011), and Argue (2012a, 2012b). Of course, we did use internet sites such as Google.scholar.com, Researchgate.com, and Academia.net, but we also used our personal networks of colleagues, and scanned the literature cited in those publications that we did discover. We generally do not include every reference that we found for a given species if the information contained had already been included in the entry for a particular species in the cited reference? .  Our cutoff publication date for incorporating information into the data base for our analyses presented here was 31 December 2020.Orchid taxonomy – We followed the orchid classification of Chase et al. (2015), except where otherwise noted.  Those exceptions usually occurred when alternative treatments have had wide regional acceptance or more recent phylogenetic studies resolve ambiguities. Species counts for genera are based on Chase et al. (2015) except where more recent counts have been published. At the species level, our default treatment was Kew's Plants of the World Online (POWO, plantsoftheworldonline.org), unless otherwise noted.  Particularly problematic has been the genus Ophrys where the number of species ranges from nine (Bateman et al. 2018) to 353 (Delforge 2016), the differences being rooted in both methodological and philosophical issues (Paulus 2019; Cozzolino et al. 2020; Bateman et al. 2021). While we gravitate towards the viewpoints of Bateman et al. (2021), we have listed pollinators of Ophrys by the taxonomy used by authors, being easier to work plant-pollinator data from hyper-splitting to broader concepts rather than the reverse, particularly when dealing with geographical patterns of variation.  Habit – We scored whether an orchid species was mycoheterotrophic, terrestrial, rupicolous, epiphytic, or a climbing vine.  Such information was taken from the references cited for that species entry, or from floras, monographs or other taxonomic literature, and internet sources such as POWO (2021), IOSPE (2021).Geographical region – Our major geographical regions are those that are listed as Level 1 of the International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases (TDWG; Brummitt 2001). We give the region(s) in which the study or studies occurred or the range in from which the species is known (based on POWO or other resources such as floras) if localities are not specific.Breeding system – We score a species as self-incompatible if it is tested experimentally with hand pollinations and either 0% fruit set or 0-5% seed set.  Self-compatibility is marked if fruit set and seed set exceed those criteria.Mating system – Autogamy or apomixis as evident from experimental evidence or unusually high fruit set with no evidence of pollinators. Chasmogamy was marked if flowers open and there is no evidence of autogamy, or autogamy occurs but pollinators are known (mixed mating system) in which case the columns for both autogamy and chasmogamy were marked.  Evidence for selfing: we marked “1” if autogamy was demonstrated experimentally (pollinator exclusion conditions); “2” if autogamy is assumed because pollinators are unknown and fruit set is high, or observations of pollinaria bending down to touch the stigma or pollinia falls onto the stigma.Reward type – Evidence for reward (or lack thereof) is based on measurements on quantity and/or quality of reward thereby receiving a “1”; when evidence is just visual or tactile, or pollinator behavior indicates what is present (e.g., pollen packed in corbiculae, oil or fragrance collecting behaviors of pollinators) then it receives a “2”. Pollinators – Pollinators must be observed performing pollinator services, or the vector has identifiable pollinaria and in a position on the body that is consistent with floral morphology.  This excludes, for example, "'Suggested' Pollinator" category of Adams and Lawson (1993). Taxonomy of pollinators follows that of the authors at the species level. Higher taxonomic levels are based on entries in Wikipedia (www.wikipe dia.org), except where noted otherwise.  If the pollinator is not identified to species level but the author indicates that there is only one species involved, then it is scored as a species.  If no indication is given that there is but a single species, or that there were multiple species of the taxon involved, then the taxa or taxon below the identified level is left blank.  dia.org), except where noted otherwise.  If the pollinator is not identified to species level but the author indicates that there is only one species involved, then it is scored as a species.  If no indication is given that there is but a single species, or that there were multiple species of the taxon involved, then the taxa or taxon below the identified level is left blank.  	Beside the use of counts to assess pollinator specificity, we developed an index that emphasizes higher taxonomic categories, with the assumption that they would more likely have different functional traits and the more such taxa are involved, the more generalized is the pollinator pool for a given orchid. Our specificity index (SI) = (number of orders ? number of families ? number of genera) + number of pollinator species. The range of the index has a minimum of 2 and maximum of infinity, the larger the SI the more generalized is the pollinator pool.  